---
title: "IP Geolocator"
authors: [josh]
tags: [mddn442]
---


Working out the location of IP addresses is a non-trivial task and took quite a bit of thought before I got somewhere I was happy. There is no rhyme or reason to the distribution of IP addresses to companies around the world which means we have to have a database to match their locations. The first option I tried was to have something or someone else do my work for me. I started with [freegeoip.net][geo-url], the same thing used by [rcmap][rcmap-url], the current real time tool for locating users editing Wikipedia. After a few trails I decided that the latency was too great as there was a bottleneck of about 1 request every couple of seconds, something that was unavoidable without using complex threading and socket magic. So I decided to write my own IP locater.


The actual information of what subnets are located where can be easily obtained from many sites. I decided to work with the .csv files provided by [GeoLite][ip-db] because it's easy to parse and is pretty accurate, but the hard part is matching the IP given to one of these subnets.

First we have to determine whether an IP address is IPv4, or IPv6. This can be done with a regular expression - a pattern that describes all the valid possible IP addresses in either format. IPv4 and IPv6 (in it's full format) are pretty simple and can be matched with the following respectively.

	r'^(?:(?:25[0-5]|2[0-4][0-9]|[01]?[0-9][0-9]?)\.){3}(?:25[0-5]|2[0-4][0-9]|[01]?[0-9][0-9]?)$'

	r'^\s*((([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){7}([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}|:))|(([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){6}(:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}|((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3})|:))|(([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){5}(((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){1,2})|:((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3})|:))|(([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){4}(((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){1,3})|((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4})?:((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3}))|:))|(([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){3}(((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){1,4})|((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){0,2}:((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3}))|:))|(([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){2}(((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){1,5})|((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){0,3}:((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3}))|:))|(([0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}:){1}(((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){1,6})|((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){0,4}:((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3}))|:))|(:(((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){1,7})|((:[0-9A-Fa-f]{1,4}){0,5}:((25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)(\.(25[0-5]|2[0-4]\d|1\d\d|[1-9]?\d)){3}))|:)))(%.+)?\s*$'


The nest step is to convert the series of numbers into a single number that allows us to do bit masking required for checking whether IP's are contained in a subnet or not. In python we can easily do this with the following commands for IPv4 and IPv6 respectively.

	def int_from_ipv4(addr):
		return reduce(lambda a,b: a<<8 | b, map(int, addr.split(".")))

	def int_from_ipv6(addr):
		return reduce(lambda a,b: a<<16 | b, map(lambda x: int(x, 16), addr.split(":")))


Because IPv6 can be in a compact format where consecutive 0's can be replaced with double colon (::), we need to expand it into it's full format before we can convert it into a single long number. This can be done in some really compact python by changing the int_from_ipv6 function above.

	def int_from_ipv6(addr):
		addr = addr.replace('::', ':' + '0:' * (8 - sum(map(lambda x: len(filter(None, x.split(':'))), addr.split('::')))))
		return reduce(lambda a,b: a<<16 | b, map(lambda x: int(x, 16), filter(None, addr.split(":"))))


Now that we have our IP address as a single number we can mask out the bits that matter in matching it against the database. We perform a binary search, masking and comparing against each entry until we find a match. Once we do, we have found the geolocation for our address, and if not, then the IP has no recorded location and we return None.

And that's the GeoLocator as it currently exists. It has yet to be integrated but has undergone thorough testing showing that it is robust and fast.


[geo-url]: http://freegeoip.net/
[rcmap-url]: http://rcmap.hatnote.com/#en
[ip-db]: http://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/legacy/geolite/