---
title: "IRC Bot"
authors: [josh]
tags: [mddn442]
---

In order to get the real time component of the Wikipedia Project working we need to be able to detect when changes are made to wikipedia in real time. I first found the api to access change 

	https://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php?
		hidebots=1&
		from=20150404214646&
		limit=50&
		hidewikidata=1&
		hideliu=1&
		action=feedrecentchanges&
		feedformat=atom


The main issues with this is the latency of downloading this in XML format through a URL request and the fact that you can't request changes from less than a second ago (even if you synchronize time with Wikipedia perfectly). So instead we needed something a little more reliable and real time.


Fortunately the Wikimedia foundation have constructed IRC channels for most of their sites, in which messages are broadcast when changes are made. In order to retrieve these changes we've created a custom python IRC bot that automatically connects to the #en.wikipedia IRC channel.

The format of the messages are a little weird and after a little trail and error we discovered that there are random Unicode characters that Wikipedia uses to designate color instead of the standard IRC format for doing so. A bit off internet digging around and we found a regular expression to find and then strip these characters from the messages.

	"\x03([0-9]{1,2}(,[0-9]{1,2})?)?"

With the colors striped we needed to separate out the title of the article and the user from the rest of the message while ignoring messages for maintenance or Wikipedia's Special pages. Our first regular expression strips out the contents of the message

	r"(?:\:[a-zA-Z0-9\.]+)*\s(?P<command>[a-zA-Z0-9]+)\s(?P<params>.+)"

The next regex takes identifies the title and user. If it doesn't match we simply ignore the messages (assuming that is one of our special cases)

	r"\[\[(?P<title>.*)\]\].*(?P<url>http\://\S+)\s\*\s(?P<user>\S+)\s\*\s.*"


Now because the IRC bot needs to be constantly running we need it to run in a separate thread from which we can poll what title/user pairs have been pulled since last time. We use the threading module to create the IRC bot and a python Queue (which is thread synchronized) to communicate between the current thread context and the IRC bot.

Everything works well so far and the next step is to work on IP locations and Touch Designer integration.








