---
title:  "Finding Events"
authors: [ben]
tags: mddn442 events
image:
---

A location and date mentioned in the same sentence are likely to be strongly related, while the relation may be non-existent across sentence boundaries. So it would be nice if we could use the sentence structure of the text to help with associating dates with locations. I found just such a [Python library](http://www.clips.ua.ac.be/BiographTA/tokenizer.py), and then proceeded to devise a cunning plan.

## Sentence Markup

We search through the initial HorribleMarkup™ to find regions of text, which we then split into sentences. We then introduce a new element to HorribleMarkup™ to represent sentences, which is applied to them before they are reinserted into the markup. As part of this process, we give each sentence a unique ID number, and build a map of IDs to original, unmangled sentences. The sentence markup then encodes this ID, so when we parse the mangled markup, we can recover the original text of each mangled sentence. This is so we can provide original sentences as descriptions of events.

## Associating Matches

There are many cases where we need to look at more than just one sentence to find a sensible event. Section headings can contain dates or places, which are likely related to any events in such a section. With dates, often only a partial date such as "January 14" is mentioned while the rest of the date (e.g the year) is mentioned in a previous sentence or in a preceding heading. To deal with this, date matches can inherit date components less specific than themselves from their parent match.

Our "event candidate" sentences start as those that mention either a date or a location, or both. Those that mention locations from more than one country are dropped, as this reduces false positives; we otherwise take the most specific and earliest mentioned location (via a rough measure derived from the geocoder's reported match type) for any events spawned from this sentence. If there weren't any locations matched in a sentence, we use a location from a preceding section heading. If we still don't have a location for a sentence, it gets dropped. For each candidate sentence, we emit events for each date match in that sentence paired with the location of the candidate. Any events that turn out to have come from an incomplete date get dropped. 

Events are then recursively retrieved from the parse tree into a single list.
